---
layout: member
title: Alex Cope, Ph.D
position: INSPIRE NIH-IRACDA Postdoctoral Fellow 
handle: AlexCope241
twitter: AlexCope241
github: acope3
scholar: pcx3ka4AAAAJ&hl
image: /images/team/alex-cope.jpeg
cv: /pdfs/team/alex-cope-cv.pdf
email: alexander.cope@rutgers.edu
---


I am currently an INSPIRE (NIH-IRACDA) postdoctoral fellow working with Dr. Premal Shah (Department of Genetics, Rutgers University) and Matthew Pennell (Department of Quantitative and Computational Biology, University of Southern California). My research generally focuses on using computational methods to study evolution at the molecular level, both within and across species. Currently, my research focuses on (1) understanding the evolution of gene expression across species at multiple regulatory levels and (2) understanding how the bioenergetic costs related to gene expression shapes protein evolution, e.g. codon usage bias. By combining population genetic and phylogenetic models with omics-scale data (transcriptomics, proteomics, etc.), I currently are or have addressed important questions in these areas of research, including:

* To what extent do translation and post-translation regulation drive gene expression divergence?
* Does functional similarity lead to coevolution of gene expression?
* What factors shape variation in codon usage patterns across species?
* Does natural selection on codon usage generally differ related to protein folding and structure?

## Teaching and mentoring

Due in large part to my time at Centre College -- a teaching-focused liberal arts college in Danville, Kentucky -- I highly value strong STEM education. As an INSPIRE postdoctoral fellow, I received training in scientific teaching 

As a postdoctoral fellow, I have been fortunate to mentor many talented students at various stages of their education. 

## Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion

Evolutionary biology does not have a great track record when it comes to 
